# A Look at the Halting Problem

## Problem Set up
The halting problem is a classic problem in Computer Science. It asks a very basic question: given a program that takes in an input, can we know whether the program will ever finish running. Progress in answering this problem was made by the work of many researchers, although many would attribute it largely to Alan Turing himself. In any case, today we will look at a very specific variant of the halting problem: Does there exist a program A such that, given any program B and any input X, program A prints "True" if B terminates when run on X, and prints "False" if B does not terminate when run on X. Spoiler alert: no such program A can exist. 

~~~js
function A(B, X){
    return terminates(B(x))); // true if B(x) terminates and false otherwise
}
~~~

## Proof
The proof is by contradiction. Suppose that such a program A exists. The proof goes as follows:
1. Construct a different program P that takes in some program X and checks the result of A(X, X). If A(X, X) is "False", then P will terminate. Otherwise, P will never terminate. In JavaScript, this might look something like this:
~~~js
function P(X){
    if(A(X, X)){
        while(True){} // Runs forever
    } else{
        return 0; // Terminates
    }
}
~~~
2. Consider running P on P. That is, suppose we try to evaluate P(P).
3. Either P(P) terminates, or it does not terminate. 
4. Suppose P(P) terminates. This implies that A(P, P) will output True, as per the definition of A. However, if we look at how P is constructed, since A(P, P) is true, then it will run a piece of code that runs forever. Hence, P(P) will run forever i.e. not terminate. This contradicts what we say about P(P) i.e. it terminates.
4. Suppose P(P) does not terminate. This  implies that A(P, P) will output False, as per the definition of A. However, from the way P is constructed, P(P) terminates. In fact, P(P) then returns 0, as per the definition of P. Once again we reach a contradiction.
5. In both cases, which are all the possible cases, we appear to reach a contradiction. 
6. Since all the steps we have taken in the proof is legal, then it must be the case that our initial supposition, that A exists, is wrong. 
7. Hence, there does not exist a program A that satisfies the requirements of the problem. 

## What This Means:
There are a few things that is interesting about this proof. Firstly, it acts as a template to different kinds of proofs to different problems. For example, we can also answer the following problem: Does there exist a program A such that, given any program B and any input X, program A prints "True" if B will not return an error when run on X, and prints "False" if B does return an error when run on X. The proof remains almost exactly the same, as long as we modify how we define programs A and P: 

~~~js
function A(B, X){
    return error_free(B(X)) // Returns true if B(X) will not have an error, and false otherwise
}

function P(X){
    if(A(X, X)){
        return SYNTAX_ERROR;
    } else{
        return 0;
    }
}
~~~
In general, therefore, we can see that these kinds of questions, the ones that ask about whether we can create a program A that reasons about any another program B and gives a perfect yes or no answer, has a clear "No" as an answer. Furthermore, the proofs to these questions are very similar one to another. Does this mean that we can never create programs that can reason about other programs? 

While the presented proof does tell us that trying to construct the program A as specified will be futile, it is also important to take a look at what the proof is NOT saying.
For example: it does not say that we cannot construct a program A such that, given SOME program B and any input X, program A prints "True" if B terminates when run on X, and prints "False" if B does not terminate when run on X. This is because the proof relies on the fact that A will work on any program and any input. This might be too harsh of a requirement for A. 

If we give up the universality of A, then we might actually be able to to write such a program. An example of this is Infer, a tool by Facebook that checks whether a given program has bugs or not without running said program. In an interview of Professor Peter O'Hearn by Computerphile's Sean Riley, Prof. O'Hearn said that Infer works because the programmers "concentrate on the programs humans write at Facebook, which is a small subset of all programs". This relaxes (by quite a large extent) the universality requirement of A. If you're interested about Infer, please watch the video of the interview [here](https://youtu.be/tKR2UZdRpV0).